# Guidelines for an effective 1:1

### Shift left the exit interview
Provide questions which are aimed to understand how a person is feeling about their role and to encourage growth. You should anticipate in your 1:1 all those findings that unfortunately often come up only when a person has an exit interview. Looking at what motivates a person to stay in an organization, the reasons could be grouped in five domains:

**Prioritization of employee development**

With this in mind, it’s important to figure out what growth opportunities each employee needs for optimum development, whether through sponsorship, coaching, mentoring, visibility, or challenging work assignments. Some questions you can use are:
* How would you like to grow within this organization ? 
* Are you feeling challenged ?

**Having a sense of purpose**

Managers can play a meaningful role in helping employees understand how their roles contribute to the organization’s broader mission. But helping employees feel a sense of purpose must go deeper than this to tap into what’s purposeful to employees about their job and connects with their own values. Some questions you can use are:
* Do you feel a sense of purpose in your job? 
* Do you enjoy your work ?
* Are you feeling challenged ?

**Caring about employees**

Explore what your employees need to do their best work. Some questions you can use are:
* What do you need from me to do your best work ?
* What is your biggest frustration, and what action can I take to help you deal with it ?
* What have you been trying to tell me that I’ve not been hearing ? 
* How would you like to be recognized ?
* What can I do to make your job more comfortable and better ? 

**Considering employees opinions**

By asking individual team members what they feel the company could be doing better, what market opportunities the organization might be overlooking, and how to leverage company resources more effectively, you’re validating that their thoughts matter. Some questions you can use are:

* What's top of mind ? 
* If we could improve in any way, how would we do it ? 
* If you were me what would you change ? 
* What you don’t like about our processes ? 
* What you don’t like about our product ?
* Are you happy working here ? What can I do to change how you feel ? 


**Focus on employees strengths**

When managers make checking in with these five areas in mind, as a regular part of how they interact with their employees, it helps ensure that people feel seen and valued. And when managers help individuals on their teams feel that way, they’re more likely to be rewarded by employees who become advocates for the department and organization, no matter how long they stay. Some questions you can use are:

* What are we currently not doing as a company that you feel we should do ?
* Do you have the opportunity to do what you do best every day ? 
* What is the best part of your job ? 
* Which of your talents are you not using in your current role ? 
* What part of your job would you eliminate if you could ?
  
### General recommendations:
* It’s vital that you actively build trust with your team, and, when used properly, 1:1’s are a perfect opportunity to do this. When you effectively build trust by investing in your team members’ success, your team will proactively come to you when things are stuck. They will provide feedback to you, and most importantly, they will bring their ideas to you. 
* Use open questions, do not ask questions that bring to yes or no answer
* Listen, listen and listen what the other person is saying
* Replay what the other person told you, to make sure both of you are talking about the same topics. For example, start by saying _So you are saying that x, y, z and that you 1,2,3_

